[Music]
Cuba and Nicaragua introduction
drug-trafficking knows neither national
nor ideological boundaries as evidenced
by allegations of Cuban and sandanista
involvement in the drug trade the
subcommittee received testimony that
throughout the 1980s Cuba has been used
by drug traffickers as a transit point
and haven for laundering money Cuban
authorities have provided smugglers with
protection for their boats and aircraft
according to subcommittee testimony
Fidel Castro himself acted as a mediator
on behalf of general Manuel Antonio
Noriega in disputes Noriega has had with
the medellin cocaine cartel finally the
subcommittee received testimony that
Cuban officials were involved in efforts
to establish ties between leftist
revolutionary groups such as m-19 and
cocaine traffickers several witnesses
testified that Nicaraguan officials were
also involved in drug trafficking the
subcommittee also received testimony
that representatives of the Medellin
Cartel entered into negotiations with
the Sandinista government over using
Nicaragua for drug trafficking
operations finally the subcommittee
received testimony regarding alleged
statements by leaders of the cartel that
they provided assistance to the
Sandinistas historical background
pre-revolutionary Cuba
had an extensive tradition as a base for
the smuggling of illegal goods to the
United States as far back as the 18th
century and continuing through
prohibition to the overthrow of the
Batista government by Castro the United
States has frequently sought the
cooperation of the Cuban government in
stopping such smuggling by the time of
the Castro Revolution organized crime
had a significant position of power in
Cuba based on the wealth that had
accumulated by smuggling and related
illegal operations at the time of the
Cuban Revolution Castro himself claimed
one of his objectives was to cleanse
Cuba of the environment of corruption
since then Castro has conducted a highly
visible public campaign against
smuggling
and the government of Cuba regularly
issues reports highlighting its
successes in the war against drugs the
subcommittee received testimony that
despite Cuba's aggressive public stance
against narcotics
during the 1980s Cuban officials had
again begun to provide assistance to
drug smugglers Cuba as a way station for
smugglers Cuba lies on the most direct
air route from South America to Florida
due to its size unless smugglers get
overflight rights hundreds of miles are
added to their trips this greatly
increases the risk of getting caught and
forces traffickers to decrease the
payloads they carry quite naturally as
the volume of drugs moving into South
Florida by air increased in the early
1980s the traffickers became interested
in obtaining overflight rights from the
Cubans elements of the Cuban government
began to offer assistance according to
smugglers this assistance was gradually
extended to refueling and repair
services assistance in laundering money
and providing safe haven from US law
enforcement authorities Luis Garcia told
the subcommittee that in late 1979 or
early 1982 bin' officials offered him
use of air strips for refueling drug
flights while garcia said he never took
them up on the offer he was aware of
other smugglers who did over time
according to the subcommittee testimony
several different smuggling
organizations were able to reach an
understanding with Cuban officials that
enabled them to use that country to
facilitate their operations other
testimony concerning Cuban involvement
in drug operations came from Richard
Gregory whose office obtained grand jury
indictments against a number of Cuban
officials in the 1983 case of United
States v hi McGill era for high-ranking
Cuban officials were implicated in drug
smuggling they included a member of the
Cuban Communist Party Central Committee
for
and Oh Ravello Renato the former Cuban
ambassador to Colombia the former
Minister councilor of the Cuban embassy
in Colombia and a vice admiral of the
Cuban Navy the four officials were
indicted for their role in a smuggling
conspiracy but were never brought to
trial because they never came within the
jurisdiction of the United States all of
the other co-conspirators in the case
were convicted by a jury which received
testimony about the involvement of the
four Cuban officials in 1988 a grand
jury indicted ronaldo ruiz and hugo
caballos based on videotaped evidence
that showed Cuban military protection
was provided to cocaine traffickers
coming to the United States from
Colombia both are scheduled to go to
trial case history Jorge Morales the
experience of Colombian drug trafficker
Jorge Morales provided insight into the
opportunities afforded narcotics
traffickers by Cuban authorities
according to Morales he first developed
a relationship with Cuban officials in
1979 Morales testified that he attended
a meeting in Cuba which Cuban officials
offered to sell him planes seized for
violating their airspace he developed
the relationship over a period of time
by 1980 he obtained Cuba's agreement to
allow his pilots overflight rights
through Cuban airspace in return for US
currency Cuban authorities provided
Morales with identification codes
enabling him and his pilots to use their
airspace safely and land in the event of
an emergency
according to Morales human assistance
was then extended to protection for
boats and aircraft used in drug
smuggling operations Morales was also
given the opportunity to buy drugs Cuban
authorities had seized from other
traffickers Morales testified that the
Cubans sold him the radio frequencies of
the US Coast Guard Secret Service Drug
Enforcement Agency customs and local US
law enforcement agencies
he said their only motivation was
obtaining US dollars morales testified
that cuban cooperation with him did not
end after his 1984 indictment instead
the cubans offered him the opportunity
to relocate his entire smuggling
operations in cuba he testified that
Cuban officials offered him a house an
operational runway and the use of Cuban
banking facilities although he did not
move to Cuba Morales said he used a kayo
Largo bank to launder over $500,000 in
drug money from kayo Largo Morales was
able to transfer his drug money to other
banks around the world ideological use
of drugs in the late 1970s Castro
identified what has been referred to as
the natural marriage between the drug
traffickers and revolutionaries the
traffickers have the money which the
revolutionaries need to launch their
operations and the revolutionaries
control the land and the people the
traffickers need to grow the crops and
run the processing laboratories Jose
bland own told the subcommittee of
Castro's decision to become involved
with the traffickers according to bland
owned in the late 1970s Castro decided
to use the growing power of drug
traffickers and drug money to export
revolution throughout Latin America
Castro's overall aim was to influence
events in Central America by
simultaneously aligning himself with
narcotics traffickers and regional
military leaders following the example
set by general Noriega and Panama Castro
pursued this policy by working closely
with the m-19 the m-19 received advice
and assistance from the government of
Cuba even as it reached a working
agreement with the cartels following
their war in Colombia maintaining a
relationship between the cartel and the
various Colombian guerrilla movements
has been a significant policy goal of
the Cuban government
Blandon testified that Castro signed the
Cuban embassy
to Colombia Ravello Renato the task of
mediating the relationship between the
guerrillas and the cartel
according to blend on Rabello Renato
reported to Manuel piero the head of
the Cuban Communist Party's Latin
American Department a witness at the
Miami conspiracy trial in which Ravello
Renato was an indicted co-conspirator
quoted the high-ranking Cuban officials
as saying quote will drown them the
Americans and drugs end quote
Cuba Panama and the cartel Castro's role
as a mediator was not limited to
disputes between the guerrillas and the
cartels
according to Jose blendin Castro also
acted as a mediator in a dispute between
the Medellin Cartel and Noriega the
dispute arose when Noriega raided a
cartel laboratory in the Darien province
of Panama in June 1984 arresting 23
employees of the cartel and seizing
millions of dollars worth of equipment
and drugs after accepting five million
dollars from the cartel to protect it
the cartel decided to kill Noriega in
revenge and Noriega turned to Castro for
help at Noriega request
blendin met with Castro in Havana on
June 21st or 22nd 1984 castro
recommended that Noriega returned the
five million dollars in protection money
and returned the plant personnel and
equipment to the cartel
during his testimony Blandon produced
photographs of himself with Castro which
he said were taken during that meeting
the photographs were sent to blend on by
Cuban intelligence three months after
the meeting they were made part of the
hearing record and were used by the
Miami grand jury which indicted Noriega
blendin testified that a week later on
June 27th or 28th Noriega and Castro met
directly in a meeting that lasted five
to six hours at its conclusion Noriega
told land owned that quote
everything had been arranged and they
were going to proceed according to
Castro's proposal end quote
although a deal with the cartel had been
concluded Noriega was still concerned
that his life was in danger as about 100
members of the cartel were living in
Panama
the Cubans sent a 25 soldier military
unit to fly back with Noriega to Panama
to ensure his safety until the terms of
the deal with the cartel could be
carried out Castro denies involvement
Fidel Castro personally denounced the
bland own testimony as a fabrication in
a lengthy interview with an NBC reporter
he denied the allegations that he
mediated the dispute between Noriega and
the cartel in addition Castro said that
Cuba was not involved in drug
trafficking and offered to prove it he
said that if the subcommittee members
would visit Cuba they would see
irrefutable evidence proving that blend
Owen had lied senator Kerry the
subcommittee chairman told a
representative of the Cuban interest
section in Washington that he would not
visit Cuba unless staff was permitted to
advance the trip and unless the Cubans
agreed to discuss the drug trafficking
problem in general Senator Kerry also
requested that subcommittee staff be
allowed to interview Robert Vesco during
the course of the visit the Cubans never
replied to any of these requests and
never made any further arrangements for
the visit as a consequence the trip
never took place
allegations concerning Nicaragua in 1984
the cartel explored using Nicaragua as a
site for the trans shipment of cocaine
and money laundering finding
alternatives to Colombia was important
because the Colombian authorities had
raided and destroyed several cartel
laboratories in the Amazon region
further Colombian authorities
dramatically increased their pressure on
cartel operations after the murder of
Justice Minister Lara Bonilla
in Panama where a base of operations
have been established general Noriega
was demanding increased control of the
drug trade and a larger share of the
profits
Floyd Carlton testified that Pablo
Escobar sent him to Nicaragua twice in
1984 the first time he went with ricardo
Boland ik a business partner of general
Noriega
to deliver money Carlton said he did not
know who the money was for since bologna
handled the delivery the second trip to
Nicaragua was to locate air strips which
could be used for the transshipment of
narcotics carlton was told by another
pilot that the cartel needed long-range
planes and air strips with extended run
ways to handle flights carrying cocaine
paste from bolivia to nicaragua this led
carlton to assume there were processing
laboratories in nicaragua during the
same period escobar asked ramon million
rodriguez to explore the possibility of
starting drug-related operations in
nicaragua documenting them and then
using the information to bargain with
the united states for amnesty ramon
million Rodriguez's account of this
request is supported by the testimony of
a miami attorney who first met with
lawyers for the cartel in bogota in 1985
and later with all the cartel leaders in
medellin in october 1986 the miami
attorney began talking to the FBI and
the DEA about his meetings with the
cartel he was given a polygraph
examination which he passed he told the
DEA that during early 1986 a bogota
lawyer for the cartel told him that the
cartel wanted to make quote a deal with
the US government for immunity from
prosecution and they in turn would help
stop the flow of cocaine into the u.s.
end quote
the cartel lawyer told the miami
attorney that cartel leader jorge Ojo
a--
quote finances both sandanista and anti
sandanista forces in nicaragua by
setting up
operations there and quote the Miami
attorney then met with Jorge Ochoa and
other leaders of the cartel at these
meetings in Medellin Cartel principals
told the Miami attorney that they had
invited him to meet with them to act as
a representative to quote open
negotiations with the US government in
quote a Choa told the miami attorney
that the cartel had quote certain
information which could be of interest
to the national security of the United
States end quote
regarding developments in Nicaragua Cuba
Mexico Panama and Colombia Oh Cho it
told the Miami attorney that the cartel
had quote worked with the communists in
the past and quote Oh Cho has stated
that quote there was a one hundred
thousand man army of radicals in the
mountains consisting of Palestinians
Libyans Peruvians Argentinians
Ecuadorians and Cubans which were better
equipped than the army of the Republic
of Colombia and had received arms from
Libya end quote
the cartel leaders told the miami
attorney that they wished to quote work
for american intelligence by supplying
information about guerrilla activities
thereby incurring amnesty for their
efforts end quote
the cartel leaders proposed quote to
have their representatives collect
intelligence for a period of six months
to a year thereby assisting the US
government and getting the intelligence
it needs on the communist guerrilla
problem at the end of this time period
they would receive amnesty or an end to
their extradition proceedings end quote
the miami attorney returned to the
united states with the cartels offer
related to US authorities and passed a
polygraph regarding this account the DEA
and FBI then decided that conversations
with the cartel would be inappropriate
and subsequently broke off all contact
with the miami attorney the material
provided by the miami attorney was not
subjected to further investigation by
either agency in connection with Nick
agua or the Contras additional
allegations about sandanista involvement
and drug trafficking came from Barry
seal who worked as a DEA informant after
he was caught smuggling drugs Seale was
given the task of documenting the
relationship of the Cubans and the
Nicaraguans by using cameras installed
in a plane he flew as part of an
undercover operation Seale flew to
Nicaragua and obtained photographs of a
federico Vaughn who US authorities
identified as a Nicaraguan government
official and Pablo Escobar loading seals
plane with drugs the material gathered
by Seale became the central evidence
thereafter used by US officials citing
sandanista involvement in narcotics
after the seal operation was exposed
federico Vaughn disappeared and no
further information about the seal
allegations materialized the House
Judiciary Subcommittee on crime found
that the phone number used by Vaughn and
calls he received from Seale was a phone
number controlled by the US Embassy
since 1985 and by the US Embassy or
other foreign missions continuously
since 1981 in its international
Narcotics Control strategy report
regarding Nicaragua the State Department
noted that there is no evidence of the
use of Nicaragua to ship drugs to the
u.s. quote since the allegations made in
1984 end quote
in connection with the seal case summary
and conclusions the subcommittee
testimony regarding Cuban involvement in
narcotics trafficking was consistent
with the findings of the State
Department in its most recent u.s.
International Narcotics Control strategy
report that report notes quote US law
enforcement agencies report the routine
use of Cuban airspace and territorial
waters as safe havens against US
interdiction efforts some of the flights
or sailings may enjoy the sanction of
Cuban authorities as there has been some
reporting that Cuban authorities have
permitted narcotics traffickers to use
this strategic location
in exchange for facilitating cuban aid
to guerillas and subversive elements in
third countries end quote as the State
Department report recognized quote
corruption exists in Cuba's
malfunctioning economy end quote
it is difficult to determine whether the
involvement of Cuban officials with drug
traffickers is a matter of personal
corruption or as Jose blendin testified
a matter of policy by the Cuban
government this is our hidden history
you